---
layout: post
title:  "ASP.NET Core Notes"
categories: c#
---

### Json Field Rename
When formating model class data to json string, the default json field name is the model class property name(with some possible case change). If a customized field name is required, we can add attribute to properties to indicate ASP.NET to do it:
1. Add NewtonsoftJson support in ASP.NET project. Install the package `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Mvc.NewtonsoftJson`. Then in main, we can add support by `builder.Services.AddControllers().AddNewtonsoftJson()`.
2. Annotate model class properties with `[JsonProperty(PropertyName = "haha")]`, where we can replace our customized name.
After these steps, json formatter will take our customized names into consideration when serializing model data.

### Return Common Code From Controller
The action function's return type may be `ActionResult` or `async Task<ActionResult>`. And `Ok()`, `StatusCode(code)` may be returned to specify the HTTP response code.

### Parameter Binding
When Web API calls a method on a controller, its parameters must be set values, a process called parameter binding. Here are basic rules:
* If the parameter is a "simple" type, it tries to parse it from url's query string.
* If the parameter is a "complex" type, it tries to parse it from body, such as json or xml. A "media-type formatter" is used to parse it.

#### \[FromQuery\] and \[FromBody\] Attributes
These attributes can be used to decorate parameters to force them to be parsed from query string and body data. **\[FromBody\]** can only be applied once in parameters.

##### Bind Json Array
If we want to bind json array to parameters, we can use `[FromBody]`, and `List<SomeType>`, to parse top json array in body.

#### Bind Url Path to Parameters
If we want to parse a section in url to controller's parameter, `RouteAttribute` can be used to achieve this:
```
[Route("api/{controller}/{action}/{myid}")]
public async Task<IActionResult> GetSth(string myid)
{
	...
}
```

#### RouteAttribute Concatenation
If we have a controller with attribute `[Route("api/{controller}/{action}")]`, and we make an action method `[Route("{myid}")]`, the full path to this action is `[Route("api/{controller}/{action}/{myid}")]`.
